.lf 1 -
.EQ
.EN
.lf 144
. \" $Header: /home/maics/tcm/cvsroot_DEV/tcm/man/man1/psf.1,v 1.2 2002/05/28 10:05:06 henkz Exp $
.TH PSF 1 local
.ds Ps P\s-3OST\s0S\s-3CRIPT\s0
.if \w'\*(Ps'=\w'POSTSCRIPT' .ds Ps PostScript
.de Op
[\|\fB\\$1\fP\fI\\$2\fP\|]
..
.EQ
.EN
.lf 154
.SH NAME
psf \- \*(Ps filter
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nh
.BR psf
.Op \-p
.Op \-o list
.Op \-# N
.Op \-r
.Op \-m message
.Op \-land
.Op \-upside
.Op \-2
.Op \-security N\fR[\fP,message\fR]\fP
.Op \-c
.Op \-inputtray N
.Op \-outputtray N
.Op \-ips_ignore
.Op \-ips_fit
.Op \-ips_error
.Op \-noreport
.Op \-sort \fR[\fPN\fR]\fP
.Op \-duplex
.Op \-noduplex
.Op \-tumble
.Op \-select string
.Op \-courierold
.Op \-nondsc
.Op \-\-
[\|file\|] ...
.hy
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Psf
can be used to change the behavior of a \*(Ps program.
It uses the Adobe structuring conventions to perform
operations like page selection, changing the page order, rotate pages,
print multiple copies, use the printers secondary paper input,
and the printing of a message across each page.
The concatenated input files are assumed to form one \*(Ps program
conforming to the PS-Adobe-2.0 structuring conventions.
The output conforms to the same conventions.
The
.B \-p
option can be used to convert input files from text to \*(Ps
before any further processing takes place.
.br
In all options with a variable part expressed by italics, except the
.B \-sort
option,
that variable part need not be part of
the option argument, but can be the next argument.
For example:
.I "`psf\ \-#1'"
and
.I "`psf\ \-#\ 1'"
have the same effect.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-p
This option is an exception in that the input files are treated
as printable text and sent to
.IR psprint (1)
before any further processing takes place.
.TP
.BI \-o list
Select the pages mentioned in the
.I list,
which has the same format as is used in
.IR troff (1)
utilities.
.I List
is a comma separated list of page numbers
.RI ( N )
and ranges
.RI ( N1-N2 ).
The initial or trailing number of a range can be left unspecified.
Neither the pages in the \*(Ps input, nor in the
.I list
need to be ordered.
.br
Example:
.B \-o\-4,9,11\-13,15\-
will cause the pages 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 11, 12, 13, 15 and 16 of a 16 page
document to be present in the output.
.TP
.BI \-# N
Causes
.I N
copies of each page to be printed.
.TP
.BI \-r
Reverse the page order.
.TP
.BI \-m message
Print the
.I message
diagonally across each page in point size 54 outline helvetica bold.
.TP
.BI \-land
Print each page in landscape mode. I.e. rotated 90 degrees.
.TP
.BI \-upside
Print each page upside down. Assumes upright A4.
.TP
.BI \-2
Each page produced by the options and input files described above is
.rm 11 
.as 11 "reduced by a factor 
.ds 12 "\f1\(12\fP
.as 12 \|
.nr 12 0\w'\s+0\*(12'
.ds 12 \v'0m'\s+1\v'-.04m'\(sr\h'-0.01m'\l'\n(12u\(rn'\v'.04m'\s-1\v'0m'\h'-\n(12u'\*(12
.ds 12 \x'0-0.12m'\*(12
.as 11 \*(12
.lf 260
.as 11 ".
\*(11
.lf 261
Each pair of consecutive pages is then printed side by side
on a single page.
.TP
.BI \-security N\fR[\fP,message\fR]\fP
This option uses an Oc\('e specific PostScript operator that can be
used allow printing of a document only if the printer receives
security code
.I N
at its console.
If this code is not entered within 30 seconds the document will
not be printed.
.I N
must be a number in the range 0 .. 99999999.
The optional
.I message
will be displayed on the Oc\('e console while it is waiting
for the code to be entered.
The default message is the user's login name.
.TP
.BI \-c
Use the secondary paperfeed mechanism.
This means manualfeed on some machines and cassette on others.
.TP
.BI \-inputtray N
Causes the input to be taken from inputtray
.I N.
The default input tray of most printers is set up by the system
administrators.
The
.I \-m
may set the inputtray on some printers.
.TP
.BI \-outputtray N
Causes the output to be placed in outputtray
.I N.
Most printers have output tray 0 as their default.
.TP
.B \-ips_ignore
Causes the printer to ignore any request for unavailable page
sizes.
The printer or printer manager might warn when this feature is used.
The results of using both this option and the
.B \-inputtray
option are undefined.
This option can only be used on printers with PostScript Level 2.
.TP
.B \-ips_fit
Causes the printer to ignore any request for unavailable page
sizes and scale the page images such that they fit on
the printed pages.
The page images from the input are centered on the printed pages.
The printer or printer manager might warn when this feature is used.
The results of using both this option and the
.B \-inputtray
option are undefined.
This option can only be used on printers with PostScript Level 2.
.TP
.B \-ips_error
Causes the printer to produce an error for unavailable page
sizes and stop processing the rest of the job.
This option can only be used on printers with PostScript Level 2.
.TP
.B \-noreport
Disables warning for unusual medium requests, like unavailable
page sizes.
Can be used in combination with the
.B ips
options above to avoid warning messages from the printer.
This option can only be used on printers with PostScript Level 2.
.TP
.BI \-sort \fR[\fPN\fR]\fP
This option is useful when multiple copies of one document are produced.
On printers with this capability it places each copy in a separate
output bin.
The start output bin is the bin indicated by the
.B \-outputtray
option.
The default start output bin is 2.
.I N
indicates the maximum number of copies produced.
The default is the number of copies indicated by the
.B \-#
option.
Blank space is not allowed between
.B \-sort
and
.IR N .
.TP
.BI \-duplex
Causes the output to be printed in duplex mode.
The default binding is as if the resultant pages are to be
bound together with their leftmost edge.
This is under the assumption that the input consist of PostScript
in the default orientation.
The
.I \-tumble
option can be used for alternative binding.
.TP
.BI \-noduplex
Some printers have duplex mode as their default. This option
makes these printers produce a single page on each sheet of paper.
.TP
.BI \-tumble
This option is only useful with the
.I \-duplex
option.
It causes the `backside` pages to be flipped relative to the front
side pages.
.TP
.BI \-select string
The
.I string
is placed in the PostScript input.
If the
.B statusdict
dictionary exists in the PostScript interpreter, it will be present
on top of the dictionary stack during the execution of
.IR string .
.TP
.B \-courierold
A special feature that triggers use of Old Courier fonts on the Oc\('e
9145.
It has no effect on other printers.
.TP
.B \-nondsc
Assume that the input does not obey the Structure Conventions
and try to make the most of it.
This is useful for output of packages like WordPerfect that
do not produce proper \*(Ps.
.TP
.B \-\-
Indicates end of options. All following arguments are considered to be input
file names.
.SH BUGS
Some options do not cooperate well when given on one command line.
In that case it might be wise to split the twp operations into two
separate passes over the file. For example: "psf -2 | psf -upside" instead
of "psf -2 -upside".
.SH FILES
.ta \w'/usr/local/lib/ProcSets/pagemess.proc  'u
/usr/local/lib/ProcSets/pagemess.proc	the ProcSet for
.B \-m
.br
.rm 11 
.as 11 "/usr/tmp/psf.
.as 11 ".N	temporary files used for page reversal.
\*(11
.lf 405
.br
.SH SEE ALSO
psprint(1), lpr(1), devps(1)
