.TH TCM 1 "09 January 2000"
.SH NAME
tcm \- Toolkit for Conceptual Modeling 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tcm [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B tcm 
is an X11/Motif based startup program for the 
\fIToolkit for Conceptual Modeling (TCM)\fP.
With \fItcm\fP you can display and start up all 
available tools.

.SH ARGUMENTS
In addition to the standard X11 toolkit options (see X11(7)), \fItcm\fP 
accepts the options listed below:
.TP
.B \-help
Write all available options to standard output and quit.
.TP
.B \-priv_cmap 
Start tcm (and the tools that are launched from tcm) with
a private colormap.
.TP
.B \-version                
Write the TCM version to standard output and quit.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
The \fBTCM_HOME\fP environment variable should be the directory
where the TCM files are installed.
.TP
.B PATH
Should include $TCM_HOME/bin
.TP
.B MANPATH
Should include $TCM_HOME/man
.TP
.B PRINTER
Name of the default printer that is used by the tools.
.TP
.B LD_LIBRARY_PATH
Should include $TCM_HOME/lib when the distribution contains shared
object libraries (files ending on .so) in $TCM_HOME/lib.

.SH FILES
The following relative path names are relative to $TCM_HOME.
.TP
\fIlib/help/*\fP
The help directory contains a collection of text files for
the on-line help.
.TP
\fIlib/TCM\fP
X Resources (the same as the ones that are built-in).
You can customize the fonts and colors by setting resources 
in your X defaults database.  Each string of the form 
``TCM.resource:definition'' sets a resource.
.TP
\fIlib/tcm.conf\fP
TCM editor configuration file. This file contains values
for some of the editor defaults like the page size, the default 
fonts etc. This file is read by each editor upon startup.
.TP
\fI$HOME/.tcmrc\fP
Each user of TCM can override some of the options of tcm.conf
by its own configuration file, installed in $HOME/.tcmrc.

.SH SEE ALSO
Frank Dehne, Roel Wieringa and Henk van de Zandschulp -- 
TCM (Toolkit for Conceptual Modeling), User's Guide and Reference.
This document is available as PostScript and HTML
in $TCM_HOME/doc or as HTML via the URL 
http://www.cs.utwente.nl/~tcm.

X11(7), tgd(1), tgt(1), tgtt(1), tesd(1), tstd(1), tefd(1),
tfrt(1), tfet(1), ttut(1), tssd(1), tucd(1), tatd(1),
tsnd(1), tpsd(1).

.SH AUTHOR
Frank Dehne (frank@cs.vu.nl).

.SH BUGS
Please send bug reports to tcm@cs.utwente.nl.

